# What are Strings?
Strings are character arrays that are null terminated, In Cpp You can create a variable of string datatype, but this is not valid in C.
*Example 17.1*
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main () {
    char arr1[]={'h','e','l','l','o','\0'};
    char arr2[6]={'h','e','l','l','o'};
    char arr3[]={'h','e','l','l','o'};
    char arr4[]= "hello";
    char *arr5 = "hello";
    
    printf("arr1\t%s\t%i\n", arr1, sizeof(arr1));
    printf("arr2\t%s\t%i\n", arr2, sizeof(arr2));
    printf("arr3\t%s\t%i\n", arr3, sizeof(arr3));
    printf("arr4\t%s\t%i\n", arr4, sizeof(arr4));
    printf("arr5\t%s\t%i\n", arr5, sizeof(arr5));
    
    return 0;
}
```
Output:
```
arr1    hello   6
arr2    hello   6
arr3    hellohello   5
arr4    hello   6
arr5    hello   8
```
## `arr1`:
```c
char arr1[]={'h','e','l','l','o','\0'};
```
- Explicitly includes the null terminator `\0`
- Size: 6 bytes (5 characters + 1 null terminator)
- Properly null-terminated string
## `arr2`:
```c
char arr2[6]={'h','e','l','l','o'};
```
- Fixed size of 6 bytes, but only 5 characters initialized
- The 6th element is automatically initialized to `\0` (zero value in ASCII code)
- Properly null-terminated string
## `arr3`:
```c
char arr3[]={'h','e','l','l','o'};
```
- No explicit null terminator and no fixed size
- Compiler allocates exactly 5 bytes for the 5 characters
- **Not null-terminated** - this is problematic!
- The compiler will keep printing till it finds its next `\0`, It may find it and it may not, So printing this array is an **Undefined behavior**.
The `printf` function looks for a `\0` to know where the string ends. Without it, `printf` will continue reading memory beyond the array until it finds a `\0`, potentially printing garbage characters or causing a crash.
## `arr4`:
```c
char arr4[]= "hello";
```
- String literal initialization
- Compiler automatically adds `\0` at the end
- Size: 6 bytes (5 characters + 1 null terminator)
## `arr5`:
```c
char *arr5 = "hello";
```
- This is a **pointer** to a string literal, not an array
- The string "hello" is stored in read-only memory `.rodata`
- `arr5` contains the address of that string
- So, Printing it's size is printing the size of a pointer
## `%s`
The `%s` makes the `printf();` function prints from the address replaced with string lateral into the null terminator.
*Example 17.2*
```c
char arr[]= "Hello";
printf("%s\n", &arr);        
// Address of first element as a pointer to array

printf("%s\n\n", &arr+1);    
// Address of first element + 1 pointer to array step (6 bytes)

printf("%s\n", arr);
// Address of first element as a pointer to int

printf("%s\n", arr+1);
// Address of first element + 1 pointer to int step (1 byte)
```
Output:
```
Hello
p"PV  // Undefined Behaviour::garbage

Hello
ello
```
## `&arr + 1`
`&arr + 1` performs **pointer arithmetic on an array pointer**, which moves past the entire array to an unknown memory segment.
## Where are strings stored?
Any string that is not stored in an array, is stored in the `.rodata` as a string lateral.
# How is `printf("Hello World!);` working?
`.rodata` stores Hello World! sequentially and terminated by null.
What actually happens is that the string literal is replaced by the address of the first element (pointer to character), then the `printf` starts to print each character until it faces null character.  

Example:
```c
printf("Hello World.\n");      // Starting from the address of first element
printf("Hello World."+1);      // Starting from the address of second element
```
Output:
``` 
Hello World.
ello World.
```

Example:
```c
printf("%c", *"Hello World\n");
```
Output:
```
H
```
It is dereferencing the first character which is pointing to.

Example:
```c
printf("%i", *"Hello World\n");
```
Output:
```
104
```
It is dereferencing the first address and printing the ASCII code.

This like this:
```c
char *ptr="Hello world\n";
printf("%i\n", *ptr);
```
Output:
```
104
```
The string here is stored in the `.rodata`, and you are accessing it through a pointer.
This technique is like using a constant array, as you can not modify the string lateral as it is in read only data segment.
Example on my words:
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char *ptr="hello world";
    *(ptr+6)='f';
    printf("%s\n",ptr);
    return 0;
}
```
This code is a runtime error, as the "hello world" here is a string lateral that is stored in `.rodata` which means that you can not write to it.
Another Example:
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
	printf("%i\n", 'a');     // 'a' replcaed by ASCII code (97)
	printf("%i", "a");       // "a" replaced by a pointer to it in .rodata
}
``` 
Output:
```
97
4206632
```

Last Example:
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char* ptr;
    ptr="hello world";
    printf("%c\n",*(ptr+6));     // passes as a character
    printf("%i\n",*(ptr+6));     // passes as an ASCII
    printf("%10s\n",ptr+6);      // passes as a pointer that prints tell '\0'
    // but it inserts 10 spaces before it
    return 0;
}
```
Output:
```
w
119
          world
```
## Some archis does not have `.rodata`, when this happen:
-> const global and string laterals are stored in `.data`.
# Scanning an array
If we have a string that will hold a name, and it is assigned by the user, I can scan it directly as a char array, no need to make it inside a for loop.
*Example 17.3.1*
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char name[10];
    scanf("%s", name);
    printf("%s", name);
    return 0;
}
```
Input:
```
Abdrahman
```
Ouptut:
```
Abdrahman
```
What happens here is that the scanf as a reminder s, takes the address passed, it starts to assign each character in a byte, then when it is finished it terminates after the last character with a null.

But here come two problems:
First is scanning more than 10 characters, Second is not scanning spaces.
## Scanning only 10 characters
In the same example *17.3.1*, if we tried to type more than 10 characters, it keeps scanning them and may overwrite a place it shouldn't overwrite it.
Input:
```
AbdrahmanMohamedEzzat
```
Output:
```
AbdrahmanMohamedEzzat
```
This means it is taking 21 characters and a null, total of 22 characters inside the string, which means that it accessing a prohibited memory.

To solve this we can assign a number inside the `scanf();` after the `%` symbol telling the compiler only to store that number of characters.
In our last example we had an array of size (10), one of them is for the null, so we can scan till 9 characters.
*Example 17.3.2*
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char name[10];
    scanf("%9s", name);
    printf("%s", name);
    return 0;
}
```
Input:
```
AbdrahmanMohamedEzzat
```
Output:
```
Abdrahman
```
## Scanning spaces
If we tried to scan a sentence that has a space inside, our lovely `scanf();` will fail apart.
*Example 17.4.1*
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
	char sen[16];
	scanf("%15s", sen);
	printf("%s", sen);
	
	return 0;
}
```
Input:
```
I hate C.
```
Output:
```
I
```
## Get string
First Method to solve this issue, is by using the get string function`gets();`from the `stdio.h` header file.
*Example 17.4.2*
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
	char sen[16];
	gets(sen);
	printf("%s", sen);
	
	return 0;
}
```
Input:
```
I hate C.
```
Output:
```
I hate C.
```
 But, this has the same problem which is receiving much more chars than the actual array size, so to solve this we use `fgets();`.
  `fgets(The string, Size including Null, file)`
 Applying it on the last example:
 *17.4.3*
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
	char sen[16];
	fgets(sen,16,stdin);
	printf("%s", sen);
	
	return 0;
}
```
Input:
```
I really hate C, really I do.
```
Output:
```
I really hate C
```

## Some problem in gets and fgets functions
The input buffer problem again....
*Example 17.5*
```c
#include <stdio.h>

int main() {
    char x[10];
    int y;
    scanf("%i", &y);
    gets(x);
    puts(x);
    printf("%i\n", y);
    return 0;
}
```
In this code, we are scanning an int value normally, then pressing enter, then scanning the string x using gets function.
When we try to input the int value of y and hit enter:
Input:
```
5
```
We can find that it only prints NULL, then the number again, and it doesn't take an input for the gets.
Output:
```

5
```

Why is this happening?
First, we typed 5 and pressed enter, making the buffer containing an int value which is stored in y, then the enter is stored as a char in the buffer.
When `gets()` gets the string lateral it looks for the `\n`, and replaces it with the `\0` character to terminate it.
for an example, in a normal state the buffer will be like this:
`'H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', ' ', 'w', 'o', 'r', 'l', 'd', '\n'`
after the `gets()` function it will be like this:
`'H', 'e', 'l', 'l', 'o', ' ', 'w', 'o', 'r', 'l', 'd', '\0'`
So, in our example the buffer is like this:
`'\n'`
Which is further changed to:
`'\0'`
So, printing out the x string will be printing NULL.
As we know this can be solved using `ffush(stdin);` before `gets();`
```c
fflush(stdin);
gets(x);
```
### Put string:
`puts();` is a function alternative for `printf("%s",);`, as you can see:
```c
char* str[]="Hello World";
puts(str);
```